.. _programming_guidelines:

========================
 Programming Guidelines
========================

Please read through these guidelines when developing for BlattWerkzeug.

Code formatting
===============

Code-formatting for the ``client`` folder is automated and enforced by `prettier <https://prettier.io/>`_. You may either run ``make format-code`` in the ``client`` folder manually or setup your IDE or editor of choice to run ``prettier`` automatically: `Official guidelines for editor integration <https://prettier.io/docs/en/editors.html>`_.

Typical development setup
=========================

It is recommended to use four terminal windows when developing, that each show the output from one of the following ``Makefile`` targets:

* Targets in the ``client`` folder:

  * Run ``make client-compile-dev`` in the ``client`` folder. This will starts a filesystem watcher that rebuilds the client incrementally on any change, which drastically reduces subsequent compile times.
  * Run ``make client-test-watch`` to continously run the client testcases in the background.

* Targets in the ``server`` folder:

  * Run ``make reset-live-data dev-make-guest-admin run-dev`` if you have pulled any seed data changes that need to be reflected. The ``dev-make-guest-admin`` target is optional, but very convenient during development.
  * Run ``make test-watch`` to continously run the server testcases in the background. This requires a running PostgreSQL database server.

.. image :: screenshots/dev-four-console-setup.png

By using this setup you ensure that all tests are run continously, no matter whether you are working on the server or on the client.

Tests, the CI-server and code coverage
======================================

Every ``git push`` will trigger a build on a CI-server that uses the Docker-images that are part of the repository. But you can (and should!) run the testcases locally, preferably all the time, but at least before a commit.

Client side testing
-------------------

Calling ``make test`` in the ``client`` folder will run the tests once against a headless instance of Google Chrome and Firefox. Technically this works by passing the ``--headless`` flag when starting the browser, which suppresses any windows that would normally be shown.

* ``make test-watch`` will run the tests continously after every change to the clients code.
* The environment variable ``TEST_BROWSERS`` controls which browsers will run the test, multiple browsers may be specified using a ``,`` and spaces are not allowed. The following values should be valid:

  * ``Firefox`` and ``Chrome`` for the non-headless variants that open dedicated browser windows.
  * ``FirefoxHeadless`` and ``ChromeHeadless`` that run in the background without any visible window.

After running tests the folder ``coverage`` will contain a navigateable code coverage report:

.. image :: screenshots/dev-coverage-client.png

Server side testing
-------------------

Tests for the server are run in the same fashion: Call ``make test`` in the ``server`` folder to run them once, ``make test-watch`` run them continously. And again the folder ``coverage`` will contain a code coverage report:

.. image :: screenshots/dev-coverage-server.png

Description files and JSON schema
=================================

The server and the client need to agree on "over the wire" ``JSON``-objects in order to function properly. As the server is using Ruby on Rails and the client is written in Typescript, this gap is bridged using `JSON-schema <https://json-schema.org/>`_. All of the relevant schemas live in the ``schema/json`` folder.

Updating schemas
----------------

The schemas are generated using an automatic conversion process based on Typescript ``interface`` definitions. By convention every file that ends on ``description.ts`` is a file that is meant to be used as an input for schema generation. If such a file is edited, the affected schemas need to be regenerated by running ``make all`` in the ``schema/json`` folder.

Rules for ``description.ts`` files
----------------------------------

* They define interfaces that are used when communicating between server and client.
* They must not import complex libraries such as ``rx.js``, ``Angular``, ...
* Because other parts of the projects may import such complex libraries, the ``description.ts`` files may only import other ``description.ts`` files.

Using JSON schema to validate client requests
---------------------------------------------

When clients want to make a request to the server, they usually need to construct a ``object`` that satisfied the relevant description-``interface``. For this part of the request, Typescript ensures just fine that the data that is send over will actually be understood and valid.

On the server a ``controller`` must use ``JsonSchemaHelper#ensure_request``. As with any helper, the ``JsonSchemaHelper`` must be referenced via ``include``. If a specific controller requires a request to be made with a ``TableDescription`` document, the source code would read as follows::

  table_description = ensure_request("TableDescription", request.body.read)

The ``ensure_request`` method will take any string, parse it and validate it against the required schema and then return the corresponding hash with the data. If the given string is syntactically valid ``JSON`` but does not conform to the schema, an exception is raised and the request is aborted with a ``401 Bad Request`` response.

This procedure ensures that at least the **structure** of the passed in document is sound. There should be no need to re-validate the structure on the server or to program defensively in order to mitigate missing keys. Even if somebody sends request with arbitrary garbage, these should be filtered out by ``ensure_request``.

Using JSON schema to validate server responses
----------------------------------------------

Because the client is only expected to work with a conforming server, there is no response-validation infrastructure in place during the "nomal" execution of the client. Instead the results of ``HTTP``-requests are simply casted to the expected ``interface``.

The server side ``request`` tests ensure that the server responds with conforming documents. A custom rspec validator ``validate_against`` should be used with every testcase that expects a specific response.

Using JSON schema to validate models
------------------------------------

The backing PostgreSQL database uses a few tables that store ``jsonb``-blobs. After all, PostgreSQL is the best NoSQL database that is available 😉 The ``jsonb``-columns are used for complex and self contained data structures such as the syntaxtrees for a code resource. To ensure that the database does not degenerate overall, the custom ``json_schema`` validator for Active Model ensures the validity of all stored blobs.

.. _explanation_seed_data:

Loading and storing seed data
=============================

BlattWerkzeug comes with a complex set of required objects to work properly. This includes grammars, block languages, example projects, ... The "normal" Rails way of providing those objects via ``db/seeds.rb`` does not work for these structures at all: They are simply to complex to be meaningfully edited by hand.

The ``Makefile`` therefore exposes the ``store-live-data`` target which stores the current state of the programing languages and projects in the ``seed`` folder. This allows programmers to edit grammars, block languages and projects using the web-IDE and to persist those changes in the git repository.

.. important:: The YAML-files in the ``seed``-folder are **very** prone to merge conflicts. Please make sure to only ever commit as small changes as possible. It is good practive to routinely use ``make reset-live-data run-dev`` when starting the server to ensure that your database-state is always up do date. If you run ``store-live-data`` from an old database state you may override newer changes that are part of the repository already.

Interactive Debugging
=====================

The preferred way to figure out the reason for undesired behaviour is by writing testcases: This ensures that the problem does not resurface later as a regression. But if you don't understand at all why something is going wrong, an interactive debugger is of course helpful.

Client Application
------------------

At least the normal development tools of Firefox and Chrome are capable of debugging the Angular application. Depending on your workflow, the ``debugger`` statement (`Documentation at MDN <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/debugger>`_) may be helpful to set breakpoints directyl from your editor of choice.

Client Tests
------------

You may run the testcases interactively by surfing to `<http://localhost:9876/debug.html>`_ while ``make test-watch`` is currently running. This will take you to a page that runs all activated testcases directly in a browser.
